---
layout: post
section-type: post
title: The Enduring Yearning For Savory Flavors
category: food
tags: [ 'food']
---

Food.  It plays a huge part in every person's life.  For me, it plays as big of a role as, and even possibly more than, friends and family.  It brings us together.  It tears us apart.  Given its importance for every human on Earth, I thought I'd share some thoughts about it.

We all spend inordinate amounts of time pondering or interacting with food ("Hey Mr. Avocado, what's goin' on pal?").  In the middle of the afternoon, for instance, it may not be an uncommon occurence to find yourself asking, "what in the Lord's name am I going to make for dinner tonight?"  Sounds familiar, doesn't it?  Perhaps this next one'll resonate with you.  "I wonder how this ranch sauce will taste on this curry chicken leg?...Damnnn girlll, that hit the spot."

The issue is, I really don't like spending my time thinking about food; I'd much rather be spending my time writing essays like this or coding or learning or doing something seemingly productive with it.  The only reason I think about food is because I like the way it feels in my mouth and my belly.  Well, I guess it's not the only reason, but it probably makes up like 98% of the reason.  The other 2% of the time I'll admit to getting curious about the chemistry of food, how it all fits into the bigger picture in the world, etc.  I really want to optimize my food intake strategies though, to maximize taste, health, entertainment, and minimize price.  It's a dynamic optimization problem that also differs from person to person.  Most of this post is going to be about simply ordering food and frequenting restaurants, since preparing food is a different kind of beast that I'm not prepared to tackle at the moment.

I've always thought that it's far easier to order food when you know what it looks like in advance -- and here's where pictures come into play.  I can remember a gruesome moment from my childhood when I was in Saskatchewan (doesn't get much gruesomer than that!) at a family restaurant, and an item on the menu called an open-faced sandwich tickled my fancy.  Only _one_ slice of bread, I thought to myself -- that would be the _perfect_ amount of bread for me right now.  Little did I know it, I was about to be graced with a gravy-soaked loaf, and if you know me well, you know I am far from being an advocate of mushy bread.  

Come to think of it, I think restaurants would be _more_ successful if they used pictures for each of their food items, and here's my reasoning.  When people read a menu, they convert the words into a picture in their head, and then decide whether or not that picture in their head is desirable.  Given that there is added error in the process of converting menu items into a mental picture, to reduce the error, why not cut out this mental process entirely?  There would then be a tighter mapping between people's desires and what they actually order.  Customers would be more likely to order what they want, leave the restaurant feeling satisfied, thus increasing the likelihood of them returning.  So there you have it restaurants.  You have _no_ excuse to exclude pictures for every one of your nontrivial food/drink items on the menu, because including pictures should, in theory, increase customer retention.  

Admittedly, restaurants may have their reasons for not including pictures on their menu.  One potential reason is that at the time of crafting their menu they didn't want to invest the money in taking quality pictures and spending the bucks to print them on the menu.  Another reason is that maybe they are an upscale restaurant, and for some reason upscale restaurants get away with not showing any pictures, because as a consumer you need to trust that a classy restaurant will serve you right even though every person's gustatory needs differ.  One last reason I can think of is that there may be some _fun_ involved in painting a picture of the food in your head based on the description, which contributes to the fun of going to a restaurant.  Out of the 3 reasons listed, I really only think the last reason has any merit; that said, I think most of the fun is _not_ due to forming a mental picture of the food in one's head, but rather can be chalked up to reading the descriptions of the food aloud with friends -- "Jerry, we all know your mouth is watering over this maple-glazed salmon on the menu right here.  Don't try to hide it, you're not fooling even the most airheaded of us -- yeah that's right, I'm looking at you Winston."  

So, okay, there's some fun to the wording on the menu, I've conceded that.  But having a cute description for an item on a menu doesn't preclude it from also having a tantalizing picture.  And, going back to my open-faced sandwich example, there's simply too large of a cost that can come with not showing a picture alongside a food item.  Another example where expectations can sometimes misalign with reality is in the dimension of quantity.  Imagine you order something on the menu which sounds incredible but when it arrives at the table there isn't enough food there to feed you, let alone a 12 year old girl from Saskatchewan.  Nobody wants to go into a restaurant and leave still feeling hungry.  I guess on rare occasions you're pleasantly surprised with the quantity -- good gracious, I never knew a _boatload_ of nachos literally meant they would serve us an aluminum boat filled to the brim with nachos.  Most of the time, though, an error in the dimension of quantity leaves you feeling unsatisfied, with a bitter taste in your mouth, and sometimes even downright angry after exiting the restaurant and getting into your car, leading to road rage, and making the world a more hazardous place to live in.  The bottom line is, I don't mess around when it comes to food.  When I'm hungry, I don't care to paint pictures in my head.  I want some good grub hot damnit.

Moving from one hood to another in Toronto this past year has kind of changed my perspective on food.  Every time I move to a new neighborhood, there's such a huge number of restaurants nearby that it's imperative that I discover the best deals and tastes near me as quick as possible.  Otherwise, I'm missing out on good times, a thicker wallet, and the local foodie culture.  People often use restaurant deal nights as an excuse to hang out, so therefore, knowing the deals results in a richer social life.  This leads me into a discussion about current software out there that can be used to discover restaurants, and, if it were socially acceptable, find others with similar tastebuds to enjoy a meal with.  

I'm an avid Yelper.  I generally write either scathing reviews or glowing reviews, but I pour my heart and soul into every one I write to try to communicate the most meaningful information possible.  I'd rather sample restaurants several times before writing Yelp reviews, but I don't have the luxury of that kind of time and money, so the data I'm contributing is a little noisy.  Besides, it's Yelp's job to aggregate over many users and smooth out the noise from its users.  Without doing any data mining I can safely say that the majority of _average_ restaurant scores on Yelp are between 3.5 to 4.5, which makes me question how meaningful a 5 point scale Yelp's restaurant scale really is.  I've thought about rescaling methods to apply to average restaurant reviews on Yelp so that they map closer to human perception.  How is one supposed to look at restaurant A which has a score of 3.6 and restaurant B which has a score of 3.8 and conclusively say that they should invest their night in going to restaurant B?  Where's the margin of error?!  At least plot the variance for each restaurant!  Hmm, now there's an idea for a more informative user interface...  

I think Yelp would be a lot better if, instead of it being centred around restaurants, it were centred around food items.  You could even add a feature for swiping left or right on various food items within a given region (okay, this is a bit of a joke, but there's some seriousness to the idea).  I rarely go to restaurants because I'm fond of its environment and whole menu, but rather, I go there because I'm craving one or two items on the menu.  I go to eat, and occasionally for the general vibe, but mostly just to eat awesome things.  Another reason I go to a restaurant, as previously touched upon in this article, are the deals that are offered by restaurants.  It seems silly in this information age that people should have to call up restaurants to find out their specials before visiting them.  Both consumers' and restaurateurs' time are being wasted whenever such an event unfolds.

You'll notice in the previous paragraph that I started listing attributes that motivate me to go to a restaurant (deals, good food, environment).  These reasons are obviously highly idiosyncratic and so restaurant recommendations should be based upon a person's preference for these different attributes.  I have a spreadsheet myself where I grade each restaurant on its taste, health, classiness, proximity (how close it is to me), price, and whether take out is an option.  I assigned myself a weight for each of these attributes on how important it is to me, and then I can compute an overall score for each restaurant by taking all attributes into account.  There are lots of issues with this method and so I generally find the spreadsheet to be unmanageable.  For example, the weightings I assign to each attribute vary wildly throughout the day for each meal and it depends greatly on the context of the social situation.  If I just want to stuff my face and don't care about health, I'll ramp up the weighting of taste and ramp down health; if I want to impress a colleague or I'm going on a date, I'll ramp up classiness, and suddenly proximity becomes less of an issue because exploring the city becomes a talking point.  The spreadsheet method I crafted for myself therefore has many issues.

I could probably go on and on about this topic, but the goal here was sort of a stream of consciousness exercise to get these ideas out of my head and into the wild.  I haven't fleshed out many of these ideas as much as I'd like to, but I don't want to spend my whole day doing so.  In summary, here are the take home messages:

1. Menus should have pictures.  It would be more efficient for both consumers _and_ restaurateurs.
2. Restaurant discovery software could be improved by factoring in personal preferences that vary by day, time, and social situation.
3. Restaurant discovery software should be item-based, not restaurant-based.

Extra Bits

While writing this article, I had a funny idea for a website/app.  Imagine an app where you can broadcast your want to get food to your friends, and propose a few restaurant ideas that people can vote on, then it automatically decides by counting down from a time limit, encouraging people to reply if they're on the fence.  If people don't like your restaurant suggestions, they can fire off a counter-proposal and make a game of it.  